README.md, before:

# GTM Marketing Session ID

A lightweight, consent-controlled GTM solution for precise, marketing-defined session tracking — with cross-tab continuity, inactivity timeouts, and external referrer detection.

→ **Tracks real-world journeys, not just browser behavior.**

## Overview

**GTM Marketing Session ID (MSID)** gives you a reliable, consent-controlled way to define and track marketing sessions via Google Tag Manager — without relying on cookies. It replaces the browser’s default “technical” session logic with a lightweight, GTM-managed model that reflects real user journeys.

### The Problem

Default **browser session behavior** is purely technical:

* A session lasts as long as the stored data (cookie or sessionStorage) remains available
* It does **not** necessarily reset when there’s a real break in the user journey
* Tabs opened hours apart can still be counted as the same session
* Sessions may persist even if the browser appears to be closed

Two common causes for unexpected session persistence:

1. **Browser process not fully terminated**
   On macOS (and sometimes Windows), closing the window may not end the browser process.
   Session-scoped data in RAM (e.g., `sessionStorage`) remains intact, so reopening a window continues the same browser session.

2. **“Reopen previous tabs on startup” feature**
   Some browsers restore `sessionStorage` from saved state when reopening tabs after a full quit.
   This can reconstruct the previous session even though the process was stopped, making it appear as if no new session has started.

> **Technical session** = Defined by browser storage lifecycle (cookie, sessionStorage, etc.) <br>→ Ends only when storage is cleared or expires

This often conflicts with **marketing session logic**, where:

* The session should **end** after a defined period of inactivity (e.g., 30 minutes)
* The session should **restart** when a user comes via a new referrer or campaign click
* The session should **continue** only if the journey context is still valid

> **Marketing session** = Defined by business logic and user behavior <br>→ Ends on inactivity timeout or new traffic source, even if storage persists

### The Solution

MSID solves this by combining:

* **Tab-specific** `sessionStorage` to ensure each tab has its own lifecycle
* **Rule-controlled** `localStorage` to allow cross-tab continuation only when within timeout and no external referrer is detected
* **Configurable marketing rules** that precisely define when to start, continue, or end a session

 → The MSID approach **sits above** the technical session layer, adding marketing rules to control continuation or restart. This ensures your analytics systems reflect **real-world journeys**, not just browser behavior.

### Benefits

* Accurate session boundaries → cleaner attribution and funnel analysis
* Stable IDs across all GTM tags in the same pageview → no race conditions
* Fully first-party, lightweight, and privacy-compliant → no PII, no fingerprinting, no ITP/ETP issues
* Runs entirely client-side under GTM consent control

## Technical Considerations

**Why not just use cookies?**

* First-party session cookies are shared across tabs in the same browser session
* Closing and reopening a tab does not create a new session ID
* Impossible to detect “soft” session breaks without extra logic

**Why sessionStorage + localStorage?**

* `sessionStorage` resets on tab close → gives us a natural session boundary
* `localStorage` persists across tabs → lets us re-use session IDs only when rules allow (recent activity, no new referrer)
* Hybrid approach = fine-grained lifecycle control + marketing-accurate session handling

## Key Features

* Pure client-side, GTM-controlled session tracking
* Configurable inactivity timeout (default: 30 minutes)
* Optional cross-tab continuation within timeout window
* Automatic session reset on external referrer
* Works in modern browsers without ITP/ETP issues
* Fully consent-compliant if triggered via GTM consent logic
* Session ID stable within a pageview for all tags
* Lightweight: one variable + one persistence tag

## What Problem Does MSID Solve?

| 🔍 Problem | ✅ MSID Solution |
|:------------|:-----------------|
| Default browser session behavior doesn’t match marketing needs (sessions stay alive for hours if the browser isn’t closed) | MSID replaces browser lifecycle rules with marketing-defined boundaries (timeout + external referrer checks) |
| First-party session cookies are shared across all tabs and can’t detect “soft” session breaks | MSID uses `sessionStorage` for tab-specific lifecycles, ensuring each new tab starts fresh unless rules allow continuation |
| Need to continue a session across tabs only when context is still valid | MSID stores the current session ID in `localStorage` and reuses it only if the last activity is within the timeout and the entry is not from an external referrer |
| In GTM, all tags must receive the same session ID immediately, even on the first pageview | MSID exposes the session ID via a central GTM variable so it’s available to all tags without race conditions |
| Must avoid cookies due to consent or privacy restrictions | MSID stores data only in `sessionStorage` and `localStorage` — no cookies, no fingerprinting, no PII |
| Need to control exactly when session tracking runs | MSID runs only if triggered via GTM consent logic, giving full compliance with GDPR, ePrivacy, and other regulations |
| ITP/ETP can interfere with some storage methods | MSID’s hybrid storage approach is unaffected by ITP/ETP limits on cookies, ensuring consistent behavior in modern browsers |


## Session Lifecycle Logic

The following decision flow illustrates how the GTM Marketing Session ID (MSID) decides whether to start a new session or continue an existing one. It shows the exact evaluation order and conditions (tab storage, cross-tab carry-over, timeout, external referrer).

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A([Page Load]) --> E{Timeout exceeded<br/>or External referrer?}
    E -- Yes --> F[[Start NEW<br/>session ID]]
    E -- No --> B{Tab-scoped<br/>sessionStorage ID?}
    B -- Yes --> C([Use existing<br/>session ID])
    B -- No --> D{Carry-over in<br/>localStorage valid?}
    D -- Yes --> H[[Carry over<br/>session ID]]
    D -- No --> F

    classDef start fill:#f0f4f8,stroke:#666,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef decision fill:#fff9e6,stroke:#e6b800,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef action fill:#e6f7e6,stroke:#33aa33,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef new fill:#ffe6e6,stroke:#cc3333,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef carry fill:#e6f0ff,stroke:#3366cc,stroke-width:1px;

    class A start;
    class E,B,D decision;
    class C action;
    class F new;
    class H carry;

```

## Detailed Decision Tree

The following comprehensive decision tree shows all possible scenarios and their outcomes:

```
🔄 NEW PAGEVIEW (Tab/Page)
    │
    ├─ ❓ DOES CURRENT TAB ALREADY HAVE SESSION-ID?
    │   │
    │   ├─ ✅ YES (sessionStorage.ms_sessionId exists)
    │   │   │
    │   │   ├─ ⏰ TIMEOUT EXCEEDED? (>30 Min)
    │   │   │   │
    │   │   │   ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │   │   │   └─ ❌ NO → 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │   │   │       │
    │   │   │       ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │   │   │       └─ ❌ NO → ♻️ CONTINUE EXISTING SESSION
    │   │   │
    │   │   └─ 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │   │       │
    │   │       ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │   │       └─ ❌ NO → ♻️ CONTINUE EXISTING SESSION
    │   │
    │   └─ ❌ NO (no tab session ID)
    │       │
    │       ├─ ⏰ TIMEOUT EXCEEDED? (>30 Min)
    │       │   │
    │       │   ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │       │   └─ ❌ NO → 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │       │       │
    │       │       ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │       │       └─ ❌ NO → 🔄 CARRY-OVER POSSIBLE?
    │       │           │
    │       │           ├─ ✅ YES → ♻️ CONTINUE SESSION VIA CARRY-OVER
    │       │           └─ ❌ NO → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │       │
    │       └─ 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │           │
    │           ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │           └─ ❌ NO → 🔄 CARRY-OVER POSSIBLE?
    │               │
    │               ├─ ✅ YES → ♻️ CONTINUE SESSION VIA CARRY-OVER
    │               └─ ❌ NO → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
```

### Key Decision Points

- **⏰ Timeout Check**: Session ends after 30 minutes of inactivity (configurable)
- **🔗 External Referrer**: New traffic source triggers new session
- **🔄 Carry-over**: Cross-tab session continuation only within timeout window
- **♻️ Session Continuation**: Maintains session ID for valid marketing journeys

## Components

* **`msSessionId.js`**<br>
GTM Custom JavaScript variable that resolves the Marketing Session ID (MSID) on first evaluation; applies marketing rules (inactivity timeout + external referrer) and optional cross-tab carryover; caches the result on window.__ms.sessionId for the entire pageview; performs no storage writes.<br>
→ Provides a single, stable MSID to all tags without tag-order dependencies; purely read/decide/cache logic.

* **`msid_controller.html`**<br>
GTM Custom HTML tag that persists the resolved MSID to storage after consent; writes ms_sessionId (sessionStorage), ms_currentSessionId and ms_lastActivityTs (localStorage); uses decision flags exposed on window.__ms._signals by msSessionId.js; contains no cookie logic.<br>
→ Persists the ID only when allowed (consent-bound), enables controlled cross-tab continuation, and keeps the activity timestamp up to date.

## Installation Guide

**1. Add the `msSessionId.js` variable**<br>

- In GTM, create a new Custom JavaScript Variable.
- Paste the full contents of `msSessionId.js`.
- Save as `JS – MSID Resolver` (or similar).

→ This variable must be evaluated before any tags that need the session ID. GTM handles this automatically when the variable is referenced in a tag.

**2. Add the `msid_controller.html` tag**<br>

- In GTM, create a new Custom HTML Tag.
- Paste the full contents of `msid_controller.html`.
- Set the trigger to fire only after consent (e.g., `Consent – Analytics Granted`).

→ This tag will write values to `sessionStorage` and `localStorage` using the decision flags from `msSessionId.js`.

**3. Use the MSID in your tags**<br>

Anywhere you need the Marketing Session ID (GA4, server-side forwarding, etc.), use the variable created in step 1.

**4. Configure timeout and logic (optional)**<br>

- In `msSessionId.js`, adjust `TIMEOUT_MIN` to your preferred inactivity threshold (default: 30 minutes).
- The script already resets the session on external referrer or after timeout.
- You can customize the referrer logic if needed (e.g., to treat subdomains as “external”).

**5. Publish and test**

Use GTM Preview mode to confirm:

- MSID persists across tabs only when within timeout and without external referrer.
- MSID resets correctly when expected.
- No storage writes occur before consent.

Open DevTools → Application → Storage to inspect sessionStorage and localStorage values:

- ms_sessionId → tab-specific ID.
- ms_currentSessionId → cross-tab carryover ID (only if allowed).
- ms_lastActivityTs → timestamp of last activity.

## License

MIT – see [LICENSE](./LICENSE)

## Author

/ MEDIAFAKTUR – Marketing Performance Precision, [https://mediafaktur.marketing](https://mediafaktur.marketing)
Florian Pankarter, [fp@mediafaktur.marketing](mailto:fp@mediafaktur.marketing)

Commit message:

refactor: move session logic from variable to consent-bound tag
- Shifted all session decision logic (timeout, referrer, carry-over) into the persist tag
- Variable now only exposes in-memory sessionId (no storage access)
- Ensures no storage reads/writes occur before consent
- Updated README to reflect new architecture and installation steps

README.md, after:

# GTM Marketing Session ID

A lightweight, consent-controlled GTM solution for precise, marketing-defined session tracking — with cross-tab continuity, inactivity timeouts, and external referrer detection.

→ **Tracks real-world journeys, not just browser behavior.**

## Overview

**GTM Marketing Session ID (MSID)** gives you a reliable, consent-controlled way to define and track marketing sessions via Google Tag Manager — without relying on cookies. It replaces the browser’s default “technical” session logic with a lightweight, GTM-managed model that reflects real user journeys.

The architecture separates resolution and persistence: a lightweight variable exposes the in-memory ID, while a consent-controlled tag performs the session logic and storage writes. This ensures that no storage access occurs before consent, providing stronger privacy compliance.

### The Problem

Default **browser session behavior** is purely technical:

* A session lasts as long as the stored data (cookie or sessionStorage) remains available
* It does **not** necessarily reset when there’s a real break in the user journey
* Tabs opened hours apart can still be counted as the same session
* Sessions may persist even if the browser appears to be closed

Two common causes for unexpected session persistence:

1. **Browser process not fully terminated**
   On macOS (and sometimes Windows), closing the window may not end the browser process.
   Session-scoped data in RAM (e.g., `sessionStorage`) remains intact, so reopening a window continues the same browser session.

2. **“Reopen previous tabs on startup” feature**
   Some browsers restore `sessionStorage` from saved state when reopening tabs after a full quit.
   This can reconstruct the previous session even though the process was stopped, making it appear as if no new session has started.

> **Technical session** = Defined by browser storage lifecycle (cookie, sessionStorage, etc.) <br>→ Ends only when storage is cleared or expires

This often conflicts with **marketing session logic**, where:

* The session should **end** after a defined period of inactivity (e.g., 30 minutes)
* The session should **restart** when a user comes via a new referrer or campaign click
* The session should **continue** only if the journey context is still valid

> **Marketing session** = Defined by business logic and user behavior <br>→ Ends on inactivity timeout or new traffic source, even if storage persists

### The Solution

MSID solves this by combining:

* **Tab-specific** `sessionStorage` to ensure each tab has its own lifecycle
* **Rule-controlled** `localStorage` to allow cross-tab continuation only when within timeout and no external referrer is detected
* **Configurable marketing rules** that precisely define when to start, continue, or end a session

 → The MSID approach **sits above** the technical session layer, adding marketing rules to control continuation or restart. This ensures your analytics systems reflect **real-world journeys**, not just browser behavior.

### Benefits

* Accurate session boundaries → cleaner attribution and funnel analysis
* Stable IDs across all GTM tags in the same pageview → no race conditions
* Fully first-party, lightweight, and privacy-compliant → no PII, no fingerprinting, no ITP/ETP issues
* Runs entirely client-side under GTM consent control

## Technical Considerations

**Why not just use cookies?**

* First-party session cookies are shared across tabs in the same browser session
* Closing and reopening a tab does not create a new session ID
* Impossible to detect “soft” session breaks without extra logic

**Why sessionStorage + localStorage?**

* `sessionStorage` resets on tab close → gives us a natural session boundary
* `localStorage` persists across tabs → lets us re-use session IDs only when rules allow (recent activity, no new referrer)
* Hybrid approach = fine-grained lifecycle control + marketing-accurate session handling

## Key Features

* Pure client-side, GTM-controlled session tracking
* Configurable inactivity timeout (default: 30 minutes)
* Optional cross-tab continuation within timeout window
* Automatic session reset on external referrer
* Works in modern browsers without ITP/ETP issues
* Fully consent-compliant if triggered via GTM consent logic
* Session ID stable within a pageview for all tags
* Lightweight: one variable + one persistence tag

## What Problem Does MSID Solve?

| 🔍 Problem | ✅ MSID Solution |
|:------------|:-----------------|
| Default browser session behavior doesn’t match marketing needs (sessions stay alive for hours if the browser isn’t closed) | MSID replaces browser lifecycle rules with marketing-defined boundaries (timeout + external referrer checks) |
| First-party session cookies are shared across all tabs and can’t detect “soft” session breaks | MSID uses `sessionStorage` for tab-specific lifecycles, ensuring each new tab starts fresh unless rules allow continuation |
| Need to continue a session across tabs only when context is still valid | MSID stores the current session ID in `localStorage` and reuses it only if the last activity is within the timeout and the entry is not from an external referrer |
| In GTM, all tags must receive the same session ID immediately, even on the first pageview | MSID exposes the session ID via a central GTM variable so it’s available to all tags without race conditions |
| Must avoid cookies due to consent or privacy restrictions | MSID stores data only in `sessionStorage` and `localStorage` — no cookies, no fingerprinting, no PII |
| Need to control exactly when session tracking runs | MSID runs only if triggered via GTM consent logic, giving full compliance with GDPR, ePrivacy, and other regulations |
| ITP/ETP can interfere with some storage methods | MSID’s hybrid storage approach is unaffected by ITP/ETP limits on cookies, ensuring consistent behavior in modern browsers |


## Session Lifecycle Logic

The following decision flow illustrates how the GTM Marketing Session ID (MSID) decides whether to start a new session or continue an existing one. It shows the exact evaluation order and conditions (tab storage, cross-tab carry-over, timeout, external referrer).

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A([Page Load]) --> E{Timeout exceeded<br/>or External referrer?}
    E -- Yes --> F[[Start NEW<br/>session ID]]
    E -- No --> B{Tab-scoped<br/>sessionStorage ID?}
    B -- Yes --> C([Use existing<br/>session ID])
    B -- No --> D{Carry-over in<br/>localStorage valid?}
    D -- Yes --> H[[Carry over<br/>session ID]]
    D -- No --> F

    classDef start fill:#f0f4f8,stroke:#666,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef decision fill:#fff9e6,stroke:#e6b800,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef action fill:#e6f7e6,stroke:#33aa33,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef new fill:#ffe6e6,stroke:#cc3333,stroke-width:1px;
    classDef carry fill:#e6f0ff,stroke:#3366cc,stroke-width:1px;

    class A start;
    class E,B,D decision;
    class C action;
    class F new;
    class H carry;

```

## Detailed Decision Tree

The following comprehensive decision tree shows all possible scenarios and their outcomes:

```
🔄 NEW PAGEVIEW (Tab/Page)
    │
    ├─ ❓ DOES CURRENT TAB ALREADY HAVE SESSION-ID?
    │   │
    │   ├─ ✅ YES (sessionStorage.ms_sessionId exists)
    │   │   │
    │   │   ├─ ⏰ TIMEOUT EXCEEDED? (>30 Min)
    │   │   │   │
    │   │   │   ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │   │   │   └─ ❌ NO → 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │   │   │       │
    │   │   │       ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │   │   │       └─ ❌ NO → ♻️ CONTINUE EXISTING SESSION
    │   │   │
    │   │   └─ 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │   │       │
    │   │       ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │   │       └─ ❌ NO → ♻️ CONTINUE EXISTING SESSION
    │   │
    │   └─ ❌ NO (no tab session ID)
    │       │
    │       ├─ ⏰ TIMEOUT EXCEEDED? (>30 Min)
    │       │   │
    │       │   ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │       │   └─ ❌ NO → 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │       │       │
    │       │       ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │       │       └─ ❌ NO → 🔄 CARRY-OVER POSSIBLE?
    │       │           │
    │       │           ├─ ✅ YES → ♻️ CONTINUE SESSION VIA CARRY-OVER
    │       │           └─ ❌ NO → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │       │
    │       └─ 🔗 EXTERNAL REFERRER?
    │           │
    │           ├─ ✅ YES → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
    │           └─ ❌ NO → 🔄 CARRY-OVER POSSIBLE?
    │               │
    │               ├─ ✅ YES → ♻️ CONTINUE SESSION VIA CARRY-OVER
    │               └─ ❌ NO → 🆕 START NEW SESSION
```

### Key Decision Points

- **⏰ Timeout Check**: Session ends after 30 minutes of inactivity (configurable)
- **🔗 External Referrer**: New traffic source triggers new session
- **🔄 Carry-over**: Cross-tab session continuation only within timeout window
- **♻️ Session Continuation**: Maintains session ID for valid marketing journeys

## Components

* **`msSessionId.js`**<br>
GTM Custom JavaScript variable that simply exposes the current Marketing Session ID `(window.__ms.sessionId)` within a pageview.<br>
→ No storage access, no decision logic; lightweight accessor so all GTM tags can use the same ID immediately.

* **`msid_controller.html`**<br>
GTM Custom HTML tag that runs after consent. It applies the full session logic (inactivity timeout, external referrer detection, cross-tab carryover), writes values to `sessionStorage` and `localStorage`, updates `window.__ms.sessionId`, and dispatches a `msid:ready` event for plugin integrations.<br>
→ Central decision point; ensures persistence and continuity, strictly bound to consent.

## Installation Guide

**1. Add the `msSessionId.js` variable**<br>

- In GTM, create a new Custom JavaScript Variable.
- Paste the full contents of `msSessionId.js`.
- Save as `msSessionId` (or similar).

→ This variable only reads the ID from RAM; it has no logic of its own.

**2. Add the `msid_controller.html` tag**<br>

- In GTM, create a new Custom HTML Tag.
- Paste the full contents of `msid_controller.html`.
- Set the trigger to fire only after consent (e.g., `Consent – Analytics Granted`).
- Mark it as a Setup Tag (Once per Page) for GA4 and any other tags that need the session ID.

→ This tag decides and persists the session ID according to marketing rules.

**3. Use the MSID variable in your tags**<br>

Reference `{{msSessionId}}` anywhere you need the Marketing Session ID (e.g., GA4 event parameters, server-side forwarding).

**4. Configure timeout and logic (optional)**<br>

- In `msid_controller.html`, adjust `TIMEOUT_MIN` to your preferred inactivity threshold (default: 30 minutes).
- The script already resets the session on external referrer or after timeout.
- You can customize the referrer logic if needed (e.g., to treat subdomains as “external”).

**5. Publish and test**

Use GTM Preview mode to confirm:

- MSID persists across tabs only when within timeout and without external referrer.
- MSID resets correctly when expected.
- No storage reads or writes occur before consent.

Open DevTools → Application → Storage to inspect sessionStorage and localStorage values:

- ms_sessionId → tab-specific ID.
- ms_currentSessionId → cross-tab carryover ID (only if allowed).
- ms_lastActivityTs → timestamp of last activity.

## License

MIT – see [LICENSE](./LICENSE)

## Author

/ MEDIAFAKTUR – Marketing Performance Precision, [https://mediafaktur.marketing](https://mediafaktur.marketing)
Florian Pankarter, [fp@mediafaktur.marketing](mailto:fp@mediafaktur.marketing)
